---
layout: post
title:  "Profiling with Valgrind"
author: Francesco
categories: [ Development ]
tags: [ cpp, software, development ]
language: English
image: assets/images/Kozara_spomenik.webp
description: ""
featured: true
hidden: false
comments: true
---

Profiling is a very important activity for any self respecting software developer, as it can help identify bottlenecks, undesired behaviors, and leaks. But too few in the industry take the time to learn how to use profilers effectively, if at all! Let's change that by profiling our first C++ application with [Valgrind](https://valgrind.org/)

## A profiler to rule them all

While there are many profilers out there, I decided to use Valgrind due to its modular nature, pervasiveness, and open sourceness. It's easy to install, usually requiring a single command from your favorite package manager:

> ~\> apt install valgrind <br>
> ~\> valgrind --version

Valgrind's comes with set tools that allows us to profile many aspects of the application, not just memory leaks:

* Memcheck: checks for bad alocatioms, uninitialized values, etc
* Callgrind & KCacheGrind: cache misses and call graphs
* Helgrind: finds race conditions and helps debugging multi-threaded applications

You can find a comprehensive list of tools [here](https://valgrind.org/info/tools.html).
Notice that none of these tools is designed to give detailed information regaridng the time of execution. This is due Valgrind design: the framework virtualizes a CPU on which the program is run. This comes at the cost of accurate speed readings, as applications running in Valgrind can take twenty times longer than normal to execute.   

## A bad program

Next, we need an application to profile. We could use an existing one, but we want to highlight what Valgrind can do for us. We will create memory leaks, repeated code blocks and other nasty behavior.
Grab your favorite IDE or text editor and let's writing!

```c++
int main(int argc, char* argv[])
{
    leak();
    uninitialize();
    calls();
}
```
Our main program will invoke functions that showcase a set of issues: `leak` will create blocks of memory and subsequenty loose references to them.
`Uninitialize` will make use of uninitialized values on purpouse.
Finally, `calls` will make a large number pointless function calls, consuming large CPU cycles.
Let's write each of them an analize the result with Valgrind.

## Leaks all over!

Let's start with our first function: leak. We are going to create multiple leaky initialiations:

```c++
int* initInt()
{
        return new int;
}

void leak()
{
        initInt();
        new char[4096];
        auto s = new std::string;
}
```

We can specify what tool Valgrind to use in the following way: 

> valgrind --tool=\<TOOL'S NAME\> \<APPLICATION\> \<ARGS\>
